The Liquid Crystal Display
The Crystal Display (LCD) is a thing. I can pick it up. I can turn it around. I can throw it on the ground. But it is not only a thing. It is also a place. We meet each other on the LCD; we get to know new people and keep in touch with ones we already know; we work; and we play on the LCD. It is a medium in the sense that it is an environment; a milieu. The LCD shares these qualities with other things and places, but it has a quality which is particular to it. The LCD cannot be reduced for example to the category of screens. Its genesis is distinctly different from that of say, the CRT screen. The LCD is a thing and a place that has a certain kind of material quality to it which is being incorporated into our vocabulary of “stuff” that shapes reality. 

The following chapters concern the quality of this material which is specific to the LCD. By illuminating points of perception that are related like invisible pixels, I hope to create a surface of something luminescent; an understanding that is real, in the way a dream is real. It is my feeling that describing the quality of the LCD demands a writing that is both transparent and opaque, both virtual and actual. It demands a writing that is neither liquid nor solid.

The LCD is a light-screen. Its essential function is to filter light by directing it towards us. The LCD makes use of the birefringent and viscous qualities of Liquid Crystal (LC) matter to bend the direction of white light emitted from a Light Emitting Diode (LED) at specific coordinates on a grid of tiny cells called pixels. Each pixel is divided in three. These are called sub-pixels. Each sub-pixel has a colour filter which absorbs the whole spectrum except for one colour; either red, green or blue. This is abbreviated to RGB. Place a drop of water on the screen of your phone or computer and you will see the individual sub-pixels in the magnification created by the water. The smaller the drop, the more intense the magnification. The red, green and blue colors are equally intense in this image. We are catching a glimpse of the architecture of the LCD. It is this grid of tiny little cells; an army of reds, greens and blues, controlled by the order of systematically flowing current, coordinating each one in time, that gives us the images that emerge on our screens.

The light that we see from the LED always starts out white. Then, the amount of light that is let through the individual sub-pixels of a pixel creates an additive colour combination that makes up the colour of the pixel at any given time. If the green and blue sub-pixels are blocked, but light is let through the red sub-pixel, that pixel will show the colour red on the screen. If red and green are mixed but no light is let through the blue sub-pixel, the emerging light will be yellow. When light is let through all three sub-pixels at once, the light reemerges as white light because the additive effect of red, green and blue light is white. 


The crucial component that makes it possible for the light to be let through the sub-pixels at varying intensities is found at the center of the LCD; a thin layer of LC sandwiched between two panes of polarized glass. One pane is polarized vertically, the other horizontally. The polarizers block out the light by default. When an electric current is sent to a sub-pixel, the LC which is in contact with that sub-pixel reorients the light. It twists the light, so that it shines through that particular area of the screen. The more voltage is applied to a sub-pixel, the more light it lets through. When voltage is no longer applied, it returns to its original state, leaving the light from the LED blocked by the polarizing filters. The screen doesn’t simply shine a light on us or block light out. It screens light, giving us some light in some places, some of the time.

The unpolarized light from the LED, which the LCD harnesses, is a strange unflickering eternal light that draws us in. This kind of light – like sunlight or the light from a bonfire – moves in all directions. It pours over us and surrounds us like the isotropic motion of a fluid substance. It is a light that we can’t escape and we go to it wherever it’s found in concentrated form.

“I’m looking for an LED. What? An LED. Do you mean an LCD? Nay. Hark! I am looking for an LED. Oh marvellous LED you are my guiding light, my blinding sun, my inevitable mothen flame. I am drawn to you. Now come to me!”




The liquid crystal screen glows. It exudes the attracting power of an inorganic mineral, which tells that it too can speak, participates in life, or has life. And yet phosphor–fluorescence remains a signal of something odd, unknown, future-oriented, because its hues do not seem to be contained in the rainbow, but are rather a property of our machines and laboratories, apparently alien to us. Seemingly, for, in fact, that glaucous light shares something profound with the glow seen on disturbed surfaces of the oceans from which we all once long ago stemmed. [...] This sea is a world we once shared with others as a home and could share again, if sharing were the way of our world.


The Grid
The LCD is structured by a grid called a Thin Film Transistor (TFT). The electric current is transferred along a grid structure to power the individual pixels. This grid is part of the functioning of the LCD, but it is also part of its material quality. The ability to make the cells of the grid smaller while retaining their ability to transmit electric current is what determines how many pixels can fit on the area of the LCD. This is measured in pixels per inch (PPI). The more pixels per inch, the less pixelated the image will look, giving us smooth curves and fine details. Whether the screen looks pixelated or not also has to do with the distance to the LCD. The closer we come to the screen the more pixelated it will look. A formula is used to determine the experience of pixel density based on a person’s distance to the screen. This is called the PPD (Pixels Per Degree). 

PPD = 2dr tan(0.5)
where ‘d’ is the distance to the screen and ‘r’ is the resolution of the screen in pixels per unit length.

The idea is to have a value that reflects the visibility of the pixels based on the expected distance of the user from the screen. Some of the highest PPD value-displays on the market today are Apple’s Retina Displays. What is implied with ‘retina’ is that the screen moves to the back of the eye and merges with the eye. There is a vision of an absolutely screened world. I have had a correspondence with Devesh Mistry who is a postgraduate research student in the School of Physics and Astronomy at the University of Leeds. He is working with LC to create contact lenses for improving vision. The lens that Mistry is working on uses the birefringent qualities of LC to focus the light that enters the eye and will be placed directly on the surface of the eye. To achieve this, he is working with nematic LC which is the same kind of LC that is found in the LCD. 

The LCD is moving from the front, or that which is in front of us, to the back, becoming a condition for experiencing rather than something which can be experienced; a new kind of seeing. This new seeing is literally a seeing through liquid crystals. Our perception becomes grounded in this material and in a sense creates a new kind of ground; a non-solid, mesomorphic ground.  This ground –– which we might already be standing on –– does not offer a fixed position from which we can observe other phenomena or objects. It is a smectic ground; a smectic foundation – a layered foundation of slippage. 

In an essay entitled In Free Fall: A Thought Experiment on Vertical Perspective, Hito Steyerl reminds us, with reference to Theodor Adorno, of our “obsession with earth and origin [and] a philosophy of belonging that obviously comes packaged within the most violent fear of the groundless and bottomless”. She ends her essay:
		
[...] we may realize that the place we are falling toward is no longer grounded, nor is it stable. It promises no community, but a shifting formation.

Perhaps there is no ground. But don’t we sometimes, at least momentarily, feel grounded? Couldn’t this ‘shifting formation’ that Steyerl writes of be a kind of ground that we can speak of? Could it be that a meaningful ground is not a solid ground, but a slippery ground; a mesomorphic ground? 

Meso
The LCD is looking at me and I am looking at it. In shaping it, it shapes me. The LCD conceals what is seen because somehow I am in it as well as in front of it. It lets me in and leaves me out.

A screen filters; it is a permeable membrane, not a locked door. Screens cover and conceal: but in presenting a secondary or fictitious surface, they also partially disclose.

Every black letter that appears on the white light of my virtual paper creates an absence of light; it conceals light. Every letter is like a void that combines with other voids to make meaning. Negatives added to negatives. Sometimes we read between the lines of a text, but we always read between the letters; between the voids. Consciousness filters. We are surrounded by everything, but our soft and permeable bodies are always filtering, letting some things in while leaving others out –– like the liquid crystals in the LCD filter light –– in order to show us something.

In Hello! a video performance by Allan Kaprow from 1969, “Five television cameras and twenty-seven monitors connected four remote locations over a closed-circuit television network.” The cameras move around frantically, zooming in and out between the different screens and people and cutting between cameras constantly creating a cacophony of people on-screen saying “I see you!” or “Hello!”, as well as a telephone that is constantly ringing. It is mostly unclear who is seeing whom at what point, but the importance is not what the communication is but rather the fact that these people are together in the same space created by the cameras and the screens. We get the feeling from the emotional responses that the participants have in seeing each other; they are really together. They are on screen and in screen. The boundary between the actual and the virtual is broken down and representation becomes presence. The people on screen become real. It is not the same kind of real as if they had been together in the same room. It is an ecstatic kind of reality; an unreal reality, which relates to being in a state between together and not together. The excitement has partly to do with the participants experiencing this novelty of televised communication, possibly for the first time. Today this kind of communication is commonplace and would not elicit the same kind of reaction, but what has been caught on tape by Kaprow is not a fascination with technology. What the video shows is an image of people who suddenly find themselves in a state between states; a meso-state in which an unreal reality presents itself. In this meso-state, something of the impossible appears to them as possibility: We are apart and together at the same time.

This meso-state relates to the exchange of energies between a form and the background of that form. No form exists without its background, and the background loses all meaning if we take away the form that sends it to the back. Yet, there is not a fixed relation between form and background. The filtering processes of the mind are not set in stone. They are in flux, but the place where we can catch a glimpse of these fluctuations as they happen is elusive. There seems to be a natural order to the bonds that tie background to form. So natural that it is invisible like air. It is this invisible wind-swept landscape of the imagination which I think of as meso-state. It is the place in which form is bound to matter, and also the place where these bonds can break, slip and realign. 

It is the middle term between life and conscious thought [...] a middle term between the natural world and the technical object's fabricated structures.

This meso-state of the imagination is reflected in the relationship between the artifice and artlessness of the technical object. That we make a technical object is a sign of something technical within us. Hence, we recognize ourselves in the LCD. A bit of media theory wisdom tells us that “we shape our tools and thereafter they shape us”. This is a never ending cycle of shaping and being shaped. The French philosopher Gilbert Simondon gives a name to the place where this shaping takes place. He calls it the ‘technogeographic milieu’. This environment, this middle place, is made possible by our intelligence. Another term Simondon uses is ‘associated milieu’. It describes specific or local instances of this process on the level of individual (or concrete, as he calls them) technical objects. The associated milieu denotes the relationship between the technical object and the environment in which it functions. He argues that humans are technical beings and that to understand ourselves we must understand technology and develop a vocabulary to deal with technical culture. He argues that the development of such a vocabulary is essential in that it prevents the pitfalls of technophobia and technophilia; the extremes of which result in either fear of or overindulgence in the aspect of human nature that is technical. 
The Stuff of In-Between
If a reverie is to be pursued [...] it must discover its matter

Liquid Crystal (LC) is sometimes called the ‘fourth state of matter’, following the solid, liquid and gas states. David Dunmur and Tim Sluckin, the authors of the book Soap, Science and Flat Screen TVs, make the claim that the discovery of LC can rightly be called the discovery of a fourth state of matter. They argue that it is more elementary, or ‘terrestrial’, than plasma which is normally counted among the fundamental states of matter. They hint at replacing plasma with LC. LC is known as an intermediate state. It is also called mesomorphic phase; meso from Greek meaning ‘middle’ or ‘in between’ and ‘morph’ also from the Greek morphē meaning ‘shape’ or ‘form’. So what we are dealing with is a shape which is not a shape but is rather in between shapes. It fits somewhere between solid and liquid. It is a common phase, in the sense that it can be stable at room temperature. Before 1888 no one had ever heard of LC, but with the knowledge we have of it today, we find it everywhere around us; “in high-strength plastics, snail slime, laundry detergent, textile fibers such as silk and Kevlar, crude oil, insect wings, mineral slurries, lipstick, Bose-Einstein condensates [...] We eat them as aligned molecules in gluten and drink them as phospholipids in milk, where they stabilize fat globules. In our bodies they transport fats, make up cell membranes, and affect the functioning of hair cells in the inner ear, and even of DNA.” In other words a material which is integral to life as we know it. It is the meso-state in material form. It is not only observable. It takes part in the way we observe. 

It was by way of studying solutions of soap in water, that scientists in the early 20th century were able to determine the liquid crystalline nature of myelin nerve fibers. Because of the seemingly self organizing properties of LC and their resemblance to cell propagation in living organisms, early LC science brought heated discussions about whether LC could be considered to be alive. What is more interesting to me is the “life”, or movement, that LC brought about in the scientific community. The fight to determine the nature or quality of a material is an aesthetic undertaking. What happened in the years of the late 19th to early 20th century was I believe a transgression of a kind of material knowledge that is still in development today. Our material reality which had been largely based on a liquid/solid duality, received the new LC state, complicating the space between the two conditions and opening up a new kind of reality; one that has always lingered in our imagination.

[...] rage, war, and passion are kindled. They are set aflame by contact with a "stuff" that is imagined as fire. In each culture the line that separates the inflammable from the fireproof divides reality in a different way.

Ivan Illich dedicates his book, H2O and the Water of Forgetfulness, to the citizens of Dallas who are trying to figure out whether or not to construct a mid-city lake. He notes that among those who are for and those who are against, both sides agree that “the natural beauty of a body of water would be morally uplifting to the civic life of Dallas.” His book complicates this common consensus through an in depth cultural history of power and control of space (inner and outer space); springing from, or at least expressed in, changing perceptions and definitions of water. 

Water remains a chaos until a creative story interprets its seeming equivocation as being the quivering ambiguity of life.

Illich creates an awareness of the changing perception of materials and the immense power the transformation of material understanding can have. What happens when the materials that connect with our social behaviour, cultural norms and political sentiment are challenged? What happens when in between solidity and liquidity and the concepts and ideas related to these, we insert LC, which incorporates qualities known from the solid and the liquid yet fails to be classified as one or the other?

Franco Berardi writes about capitalism in terms of a liquid; a flow which washes away and cleanses everything in its way, “ridding the world of the “waste products” of the indefinite, the confused, the hairy or the dusty, prepare[ing] the way for digital, smooth surfaces without asperities.” It is this same story of the “power of water to clean” that Illich tells, taking us from the myths of ancient Greece to what he calls the dream of a modern city. The modern city that he speaks of is what he calls “the utopia of the odorless city”. A utopia brought about by the cleansing powers of water. The power of liquid is also explored in Hito Steyerl’s film Liquidity Inc. where a proliferation of imagery flows into and becomes entangled in the waters of capitalist jargon, revealing its intimate relation to stuff that flows. 

In her yet unpublished book on LC, Esther Leslie looks at the history of LC and the political and social developments before and after the discovery of LC, connecting liquid and solid states of matter to developments and movements in social and political thinking. Towards the end of one chapter on the development of liquid and crystal thought in art and politics, Leslie asks, “What if a mode of thought were in intimate connection with phases of matter, which also emerge historically, or come to be known at historical moments?” And she continues:
	 	 	
Is reactionary thought always a hardening and emancipation always a melting? Is liquidity a revolutionary hope – whereby current states dissolve, political renegades are liquidated, the gush of authentic sentiment overcome the stasis of convention, and so on - or is it a capitalist necessity, along with liquid assets, the free flow of trade and labour power, the command to sink or swim in a modern global economy?

What can be said of a liquid crystal experience? Is there such a thing? Is it possible that we have a job to do in catching up with our material reality? Can we do this by stepping into the still invisible realm of LC? Illich writes about imagination: “The imagination is not –– as its etymology might suggest –– the faculty of forming one's images of reality. It is, rather, the faculty of forming images of the invisible” Some pages earlier he speaks of this invisible place from where the modes of water take shape; the place from where “stuff” finds a relation to form. I can’t help but read into his words a shimmering reflection of something liquid crystalline.

“[B]eneath the mass of images, verbal variations, moods, tactile experiences, and lights that shape water in our imagination, there is a stable, dense, slow, and fertile watery stuff that obscurely vegetates within us. It lies beyond the reach of any one of our separate senses: "its black flowers bloom in matter's darkness"

Can we bring this watery stuff that obscurely vegetates within us to the surface? Can we learn to harness it or is it destined to vegetate in the shadows of solidity, in the depths of liquidity and in the gaseous clouds that hover out of reach, occasionally striking the odd earthling with a wondrous, tortuous bolt of plasmatic light? Towards the end of one chapter in Leslie’s book on LC she writes:

What are the connections between liquid crystals, those in the laboratory and in our devices, and us, as bodies and as thinkers? Might this phase discovered in 1888 allow the formulation, as Engels put in his Dialectics of Nature, written in the 1870s and 1880s, of ‘in its universally valid form a general law of development of nature, society, and thought’?

I will not try to give an answer to these questions, but I hope the sound of them reverberate and echo in you as they do in me. In any case, it would not be a question of finishing a three bridge wonder whose foundation was laid by Engels. We are no longer building on the shoulders of giants or repairing the philosophical towers of the genius architects of the mind. If we imagine a work of the liquid crystalline kind it is perhaps more like sheets of elastic, soft tissue resting upon and slipping between layers, like the layers of smectic LC which are organized into coherent molecular layers; a plurality of foundational elements which are themselves shifting in relation to each other, like tectonic plates in fast motion, moving to a heat that emanates from the core of our being. 

Carrot Seeds
A collection of carrot seeds. Half centimeter ovals with two dozen or more soft tentacles, legs perhaps, protruding from the sides and the top of each specimen. The distribution of the tentacles somewhat regular, although missing in some areas and lumped together in others. The seeds vary in size but are roughly half a centimeter long, and a bit narrower, as indicated by the legend in the lower left corner. They are seen on a black background with the core of each in hues of brown and beige, the tentacles white, like bursts of starlight against the darkness of a night sky. There are thirteen seeds in total. Three of them are, unlike the rest, lumped together one on top of the other as if copulating or attracted by some invisible force. They are centipedes, scurrying around on a black surface, attracted to each other and then repelled. They flock together and are clearly recognised as the same, although at this moment each one is different from the other. Scientific rigor and exactitude has a tendency to reveal more than it intends.

a carrot seed which is the virtuality that actualizes a carrot → a carrot which is the historical virtuality (seed) that actualizes liquid crystal state (LC) → LC which is the virtuality (seed) that actualizes the LCD → the LCD which is the virtuality that, in this moment, actualizes the carrot seed before becoming again a carrot seed which is the virtuality that actualizes a carrot → a carrot which is the historical virtuality (seed) that actualizes liquid crystal state (LC) → LC which is the virtuality (seed) that actualizes the LCD → the LCD which is the virtuality that, in this moment, actualizes the carrot seed before becoming again... 

We lay flat on our backs to observe the stars. We stall activity to experience movement, not attempting to resist the gravity of existence by aligning vertically with reason. Although maybe it is by means of reason that we trick ourselves into moving from one observant state to another. The unconnected points of light on the dark screen of the night sky connect in me like rampant pixels. The pixels on my smartphone show me an old note from a lecture by Mark Fisher entitled ‘California Über Alles (From Psychedelia to Smartphones)’; “The stars are raining down on me. The sky has exploded. I know this is not true. But it is the truth”. Fisher was reading an account of an LSD trip undertaken in the desert at Zabriskie Point. The words belong to Michel Foucault. I have been to Zabriskie Point twice before Mark Fisher told this story. The first time, when I was fourteen, I stepped out of an air conditioned van into a scorching wind that hit me at 51 degrees celsius. The second time, some years later, was in Antonioni’s film Zabriskie Point from 1970. Both times were intense and otherworldly.

Returning to the carrot seeds: I’m looking at the carrot seeds on an LCD and find myself wobbling in a state of double reflexivity. A feeling of being stuck between beginnings. Between the virtual carrot seed and the actual carrot seed, sending me into orbit around the LCD’ed carrot seed. They lose distinction and merge in a bizarre unity that has a definite feeling to it. A sense of material presence, which I would describe as neither virtual nor actual. The virtual and the actual are like different phases of reality’s material.

The actual-virtual couple [...] extends into the opaque-limpid, the expression of their exchange. But it needs only a modification of conditions (notably of temperature) for the limpid face to darken, and for the opaque face to acquire or rediscover its limpidity.
 
The strange feeling of looking at these seeds is connected to my knowledge of the technological genesis of the LCD which carries a story about carrots. 

Phase Transition
When a material passes from one state to another it’s called phase transition. Phase transitions don’t happen gradually. They happen all at once. In 1888 the Austrian botanist and chemist Friedrich Reinitzer observed an anomaly in the behaviour of cholesteryl benzoate (a cholesterol) which he extracted from carrots. He noticed that when he heated the substance to its melting point it would not only melt once but twice. First at 145°C and then again at 178.5°C. The cholesterol seemed to have two distinct melting points instead of one. On the 14th of March 1888 Reinitzer wrote a letter to Otto Lehmann, a German crystallographer who would be the driving force in promoting LC as a singular state of matter. In his letter, Reinitzer described what he had seen when cooling his sample. Above the 178°C he has a transparent liquid. Then upon cooling: 

[...] violet and blue colours appear, which rapidly vanish with the sample exhibiting a milk-like turbidity, but still fluid. On further cooling the violet and blue colours reappear, but very soon the sample solidifies forming a white crystalline mass.

The process was also reversible. No matter how many times he heated and cooled the cholesterol, the same transitions would occur at exactly the same temperatures. In between these violet and blue flashes –– in the intensity of melting heat and crystallizing cold –– a new kind of matter was being discovered. Strange to think that just seven months after Reinitzer sent this letter to Lehmann, in October 1888, Louis Le Prince, “an ex-pat Frenchman living and working in Leeds [...] shot the first motion pictures on paper film using a single-lens camera.” A few years later, the more well known Thomas Edison in America and the Lumiere Brothers in France presented their first motion pictures, all while the scientific debates surrounding LC were taking flight. The contradiction inherent in both the ‘liquid crystal’ and the ‘moving image’ points to a new kind of material understanding emerging at exactly the same time. Who could have known that these two ideas would later merge in the LCD? 

“Flowing crystals! Is that not a contradiction in terms?” Maybe we still think of it as a contradiction without realizing that crystals are flowing everywhere around us. We are like flowing crystals which have transitioned from the aquatic womb state of pre-infancy, brought into the world in a hot moment of heightened pain and blinding white light. Now we are cooling until we pass into the next phase marked by the rigidity –– the rigid stiff. Rigor mortis, the stiffening of joints and muscles which persists many days after the moment of death, brings this material phase analogy to a state of exaggerated completeness.

The material phase analogy for old age is crystalline in nature, the one for youth is liquid. But when exactly do we pass from the liquid phase to the crystalline phase? We could say that the transition is gradual but the analogy would only be half good, as phase transition is not gradual, but instantaneous. If we feel the need to resist this analogy it might be due to a lingering 19th century material reality which has not yet incorporated, embodied, the mesomorphic phase. If a liquid must necessarily pass directly into crystalline solid state, in what state would life unfold? In what sense could we imagine the life event? Where would it take place? The discovery of LC brings the analogy to life, in the sense that if something were to pass from liquid to solid, or from solid to liquid, before 1888 it would have happened all at once, leaving no room, no time for life to unfold. 

We are not water anymore. We can only aspire to be like water, like Bruce Lee in Hito Steyerl’s Liquidity Inc., who repeats throughout, “Be water my friend”. The amorphousness of water is its power. If you have no shape you can flow freely, pass an obstacle by surrounding it, eroding it, soaking it, uprooting it. In the face of an amorphous being, the more crystalline consciousness deforms. Picture an adult making eye contact with an infant. The more structured adult loses composure and changes, involuntarily giving in to the current of the infant. It might begin by mirroring, still resisting absolute immersion, but eventually will go off on its own series of deformations caused by the current of the infants shapeless condition. But the shape of the more crystalline consciousness will not always conform to the shapeless flow of the infant. Every pull of the amorphous current will send the semi-solid face of the adult into a series of contortions, lashing out in one direction, in attempting to stay with or resist the current, only to find the limit of its own shape, making it whip back on itself. Waves of unwillingness ripple in the opposite direction causing discomfort which we attempt to interpret and conform to the general flow of the current. The resulting shapes and expressions are often funny, but they are always balancing on the edge of the grotesque. The infant laughs at the torsional shear, the bulges, the dislocations and the bubbly ripples that appear on the (sur)face of the elastic creature that has turned completely wobbly and disjointed in trying to match what it sees, but the effect is like someone who has fallen in the river, splashing about to stay afloat. If the structure immersed in the liquid flow is too solid, too crystalline to properly get behind the whims of the current, the impact of the liquid on the solid might cause the crystalline structure to fracture or dislocate entirely. And so, the liquids that meet the solid “emerge unscathed, while the solids they have met, if they stay solid, are changed –– get moist or drenched.” Attempting to resist the current will only result in a strain on the body which increases exponentially the longer resistance is upheld. If you refuse or are unable to follow the current or flow, the strain on your body may result in an overflowing of liquid from within –– a stoic tear might then adorn a crystalline cheek.

We find this power of fast and furious, instantaneous transition of material phaseat the core of dramatic effect. The height of enjoyment of the crystalline is in its most liquid state. It is funny. It is grotesque. It is tragic. It is drama. Think of Christopher Nolan’s Hollywood blockbuster, Interstellar which is very explicit in its tensions and rapid transitions between, or juxtapositions of, fluid and crystal phases. Matthew McConaughey’s perfectly cast, perfectly lit face, etched into the silver screen, is seen throughout the film sobbing and bursting into tears. The crying scenes are full of dramatic power. Reinforced by the story, we are not in doubt for one second that Cooper is the incarnation of the solid hero, leaving his family behind in a selfless act to save humanity. But even out of context, when the diamond cut face deforms into rivers of tears, that is drama in and of itself. We don’t even need a reason. Examples of this are found in an even more exaggerated form in adverts, because of the need for strong emotional impact within the confines of limited duration. In one example – particularly relevant to this writing – the aspect of human identification is sacrificed in the image. In the 2016 Sky Q advert for a product they call Fluid Viewing, we see a television image turn into a birefringent liquid that flies through the empty rooms of someone's home. This dynamic liquid is simply seen bouncing off inanimate solid objects for the duration of the spot, imbued with autonomy and individuality through the sound of Sammy Davis Jr. singing “I Gotta Be Me”. This is an example of this direct drama of phase transition; drama without story. 

In Antonioni’s Zabriskie Point this direct drama is used to undermine the narrative structure that the film simultaneously proposes. The main character is amorphous. He is part of the counterculture and yet he doesn’t fit in. His identity is fluid and so are his actions. The movie tries to follow his logic. The result is an unending series of digressions that erode the structure of the supposed political narrative. He seems to move around in a story which assumes that it has structure while at every intersection or crossroad it melts or is dragged along by his unpredictable isotropic motion, that relentlessly denies the story the structure it attempts to uphold. 

Double Refraction
The emerald hides in its facets a bright-eyed water-sprite.

I recently visited The Natural History Museum (NHM) in London. I went there to see a particularly large chunk of calcite crystal also known as optical calcite or Iceland Spar. This crystal was used by Otto Lehmann in experiments with LC. Observed through his polarizing microscope he was able to determine LC as a separate state of matter from liquid and crystal. This specific kind of microscope used by Lehmann was known as a Nicol. The Nicol used a cleaved calcite crystal to polarize the light revealing the anisotropic structure of the LC matter. The polarized light that exited the Iceland Spar could be used to show birefringence in the seemingly liquid substances that he was studying. Birefringence is a sign of structural orientation of molecules usually associated with crystals. Liquids cannot be birefringent because the very definition of a liquid is that it is a substance which on a molecular scale has no positional or orientational order. No wonder Lehmann was compelled by these flowing substances that seemed nevertheless to retain the birefringent qualities of crystals. 

Before entering the Earth’s Treasury exhibition there are some aphorisms printed on the wall: “crystal clear”, “set in stone”, “all that glitters is not gold”, etc. This crudely reminded me of the material qualities of language which is one of our oldest, if not our oldest, technology. Crystallography is a science based on observation of light as it passes through structured matter. We read light to understand the structure of that which it has touched, as it passes on its way and in reading the light we write the stuff. Crystallography literally means ‘lucid writing’. It is an exact science. It is a science for the seeing. It is a kind of writing that shines with the light of day and brings with it a terrific sense of solidity and structure to reality. It brings with it the brilliance of order, albeit a looming sensual determinism, and a darkness on the other side; a sense that we shall remain blinded by the light of day, oblivious to the obscure edges of reality. Still, in the light of day, at least we can hold on to darkness as something other than light.

To see was terrifying, and to stop seeing tore me apart from my forehead to my throat. 
Am I lucid? On my way here I found myself standing still, staring down into the screen of my phone. I was expecting it to show me my location on a map. Instead I was looking at a washed out yellow surface with a thin light-grey translucent grid like structure layered on top. In the middle of the screen was a blue dot. The blue dot pulsated, sending out little circular ripples in a smooth steady motion. The blue dot was my location on an absent map; the map of a yellow desert with no roads. All I could tell was that I was somehow present. I had been located, somewhere. A couple on the opposite side of the street were looking down as well. I might have superimposed the image of the blue dot onto them but they looked lost. Maybe they were also searching for a connection. Maybe they were also out of data with no wifi. It occurred to me that maps used to be a technology intended to verify location. Now that our location on the map is shown, the map becomes the primary source of orientation. Our virtual location on the map becomes the only actual location to go by. Street names on corners and sides of buildings, patches of green, house numbers, etc. are signs that can help us confirm what we see on the map. We look down to know where we are and out to confirm that knowledge. What we are looking down at is the refracted light of the LCD. This is how we find our way in the yellow city desert.

A thousand years ago, Vikings from Northern Europe used a refracting light technology to find their way on the open sea. The most common way of navigating was by coastal orientation. An older member of the crew who knew the coast would guide the boat by looking out horizontally, reading the signs of the hills, rocks and fjords as they passed by. This is similar to the way I navigate to the RCA in Battersea from my home in Finsbury Park, walking a familiar route to bus 19 and looking out the side window for the signs of buildings, parks and rivers which give me clues for when to get off. This kind of horizontal navigation (coastal orientation) doesn’t require refracting light. It is only when we are headed for an unknown location that we need vertical navigation tools. For the Vikings it could be potentially fatal to lose sight of land. In some cases that are chronicled in the Icelandic sagas, a storm would blow the boat out of sight of land. With persistent fog and winds disorienting the crew, it could happen that the sailors would become ‘havvild’ (litt. ‘ocean wild’), an old Danish word for being lost at sea. If they survived the storm, but lost sight of land the situation could be fatal. They would have to take a wild guess at the direction of land. If they were wrong they would be doomed unless they had an expert navigator on board who would carry with him a special technology known as a sunstone (Icelandic: sólarsteinn). Holding this stone to the sky, he would be able to find north by determining the direction of the sun, even when it was just below the horizon or in overcast or foggy conditions. Iceland Spar is a translucent rhombohedral crystal which has birefringence and can be used to analyse polarized light. If a cross is made on one side and observed through the crystal, two distinct crosses can be seen next to each other or overlapping. If the crystal is held to the sky and looked through, rotating the crystal can tell the direction of the sun by comparing the brightness of the two crosses. The sunstone at the NHM in London has a black cross on one side. Again, with the black cross like earlier with the blue dot, I’m reminded that I’m present somewhere. Without the blue dot we are increasingly lost in the yellow city desert as the Vikings would have been without the sunstone on the blue of the open sea. Is the LCD showing us the way? Is it guiding us? And if so, where to?

Staring at an amethyst, I move my torso slightly to the left. I bend my knees and move my head to the right. Every repositioning of my body creates a glitter, a shimmer of light, of colour, of fire and life; sometimes a deep inner source of purple and sometimes a shallow kind of white brilliant light which appears to be stuck onto the surface of the crystal, or maybe hovering just above it, imperceptibly close to the surface. Turning my head or changing my perspective on the stone does not reveal any of its secrets. It sometimes seems less like I am looking at the crystal and more like I am acting for it – performing some strange ritualistic dance for the stone. One moment I am convinced that I am making the stone shimmer, the next it is the stone that has this glistening power over me. I have thrown my glaucous eyes on a stone and I tell you that I have seen it, yet I am only dancing for the stone. We are all dancing for the stone. 

I’m reminded of Dream House: La Monte Young’s permanent sound installation in Tribeca, New York City. Here you are in a room with four speakers, one in each corner of the room. They emit constant uniform sine waves at different pitches. It is impossible to determine the source of each tone, as they bounce off every surface of the room and endlessly intertwine. If you stand still, you hear only one kind of sound; a combination of highs and lows that seem to emanate from inside your head, but the slightest movement of your body changes the whole scape. Moving through the room is like creating your own personal drone symphony. No place in the room sounds the same. It is a strange experience. In this room you are not yourself. You become as if once removed. You are between yourself and the source of the sound, and you become so aware of the presence of your own perceiving faculties that these appear in front of you as uneasy elements of the external –– a strange kind of inversion, like the exhilarating experience I had as a kid when I found out that I could turn the tick-tock of my alarm clock into a tock-tick –– reminding me that my sensing is habitual and that habits can be broken. We are not only onlookers. We are onlookers that are made of onlooking stuff and we make stuff that makes us look on things differently. This is a continuous negotiation with ourselves and our surroundings.

[...] between man and nature there develops a technogeographic milieu[...] This environment, which is at the same time natural and technical, can be called the associated milieu.

In this associated milieu or meso-state, what we think of as internal (background or condition for our experience) merges with what seems to us external (the form). When this happens we can have a dialogue with the external. We can change something in it and consequently it changes something in us. It is in situations like these when we find ourselves peering in between established notions of reality that we can negotiate reality. It is in situations like these that we might find ourselves speaking to a shoe:

You’re certainly not a replica. You’re not a shadow or an apparition or even an impression. You’re not the shoe in itself but neither are you just a shoesign. It’s like you’re oscillating between an image and an object. Specially when you’re up there big on the screen like that. I can almost physically feel you. You’re sort of resonating at a very low pitch. You become almost audible, but hardly visible. You’ve gone right near the edge of seeing. You’re beyond an image. You’re without an image. You’ve gone beyond tangibility, like a pure sensation...

...like a dream
“I’m sitting on a plane of a material that seems like rigid water, like a kind of glass that has a kind of degree of movement to it, like it gives a little. A plane that gives. So, it is transparent like water, or a glass plate, and is one and a half centimeters thick, and I'm sitting on it and it is sort of spread out like a blanket with sort of jagged edges, like it is not a perfect square or rectangle or circle, it just kind of has frayed edges and it’s around me and it's maybe one and a half meters in length and width. And I’m sitting in the middle of some sort of scenario which is half-inside and half-outside. And it is as if I need to be protected in some way. So it's good to have it, this material, with me, also to sit on. And then, if you move on it and sort of lean forward, out, it becomes in a way where it, suddenly you get this, "fjuhh", you see, when you go beyond a certain point in how much you have moved, or moved on it, it will give and sort of cascade in a quick way like water does when it has got momentum, a push, or like in a stream or by the force of gravity. So, just for a moment it goes like, "fjuiht" and then it stops again if you stop moving. It would move as if you took the corner of some dough and stretched it out with your hand. You lean down and grab it and, "whhuu", suddenly it moves like, with a much more powerful movement before contracting again. So it’s like a mixture of full motion and contraction... which I experienced as something kind of... good.”
An Older Dream
“I am at a loss to give a distinct idea of the nature of this liquid, and cannot do so without lots of words. Although it flowed with rapidity in all declivities where common water would do so, yet never, except when falling in a cascade, had it the customary appearance of limpidity. It was, nevertheless, in point of fact, as perfectly limpid as any limestone water in existence; the difference being only in appearance. At first sight, and especially in cases where little declivity was found, it bore a resemblance, as regards consistency, to a thick infusion of gum arabic in common water. But this was only the least remarkable of its extraordinary qualities. It was not colourless, nor was it of any one uniform colour- presenting to the eye, as it flowed, every possible shade of purple; like the hues of a mercurial silk. [...] Upon collecting a basinful, and allowing it to settle thoroughly, we perceived that the whole mass of liquid was made up of a number of distinct veins, each of a distinct hue; that these veins did not commingle; and their cohesion was perfect in regard to their own particles among themselves, and imperfect in regard to neighbouring veins. Upon passing the blade of a knife athwart the veins, the water closed over it immediately, as with us, and also, in withdrawing it, all traces of the passage of the knife were instantly obliterated. If, however, the blade was passed down accurately between the two veins, a perfect separation was effected, which the power of cohesion did not immediately rectify.“

Strike
Hito Steyerl’s 28-second film STRIKE opens with this bold serif word fading slowly onto the screen. It is a seven second fade from a black screen with the letters gradually appearing; the white of the letters taking up most of the surface of the screen. The title takes up ¼ of the entire duration of the video. The word and size of the word along with the duration and typeface, altogether give a sense of urgency to the title; it’s a call-to-action, a slogan or the beginning of an overzealous manifesto. With a seven second fade we are sure to have time to read it. The typeface is stencil-like, as if chiseled and stamped in a hard material, but this stark appearance is contrasted by the softness of the fade. Letter spacing is sloppy adding to the feeling of urgency; there is a message here, a greater purpose, something that needs to be communicated fast; no time for design, yet there is an awareness of the patience needed to communicate. 

At seven seconds the video cuts to a medium shot of Steyerl. She is framed below the chest and up, centered in the space created between the edge of an LCD screen (her LCD) and the edge of the frame, effectively the edge of the LCD I am viewing her video on (my LCD). This kind of framing; a typical over-the-shoulder shot which is standard cinematic language for a dialogue scene involving two or more people, puts her in dialogue with the LCD and forewarns of the dialogue that I am about to have with this thing in front of me; my LCD.

Behind her is a beige wall of the kind that you might find in a home or small studio. There is a somewhat domestic or private feeling to it. Her clothes are black, her hair is dark, the screen is black and the wall is a darkened beige, similar to her skin which is brighter and more lit than the wall. Nothing in the image is colorful. The scene is dimly lit with the light coming in from the right. Steyerl has her head turned slightly to the left, her eyes looking off to the right towards the LCD. This causes the light to split down the center of her face. The different directions of her head and eyes is an unwillingness of the body to submit fully to conscious will. She is determined in a cautious sort of way. Not like the hero who is unwillingly shaped by the predetermined ‘right thing to do’. Not like a hero who brings order but like an observant leader who retains a spirit of doubt in the moment of action. She stands still for a moment before advancing towards the LCD. 	

At eleven seconds the video cuts to the reverse shot. We see the LCD in full view standing on a white pedestal and Steyerl moving towards it. The LCD is off. The screen is black with a tiny red light on the right edge indicating that it is plugged in. The backdrop is a black folded curtain. This is a stage; a public setting where something is presented. The private and the public are thus contracted in the cut between this shot and the previous one. She is in an intermediate state, a meso-state, between private and public. This is the playing field of art and politics today. Our bedrooms, livingrooms and bathrooms are public arenas for these games. STRIKE is uploaded to YouTube, bringing it into my home. Without hesitation, as she approaches the LCD, she lifts into the frame a chisel followed by a hammer. As soon as she is close enough to the LCD she sets the sharp end carefully to the bottom area of the screen, lifts the hammer and delivers an adequate blow. She strikes the LCD. The strike immediately makes light emerge from the dark surface of the LCD. The surface has cracked. Light is leaking through, disrupting an obscure surface and revealing the dislocations that separate representation from what it represents. Steyerl exits the frame and for the remaining eight seconds of the film we are left with this static image of the fractured screen. We are left with this hidden light now glaring, staring at us from within the screen. The liquid crystalline material of the LCD is speaking for itself from a place between art and politics. Liquid crystal matter is released from the crystallized, structured form of LC which is found in the LCD, where the LC is subjected to the geometric matrix of the TFT pixel-grid. By force of a direct action –– which is in dialogue with language –– the quality of this meso-state is released and revealed. The LC is re-liquified and frozen at the same time. The LC which has been ordered is, through a disordering action, re-presented as liquid crystalline. 

Seashells
I’m walking along the beach. People come to the seaside for many different reasons. A man I saw earlier, is meandering along the shore with a metal detector. He was probably looking for valuables lost in the sand. The beach is a place for recreation, a place where activities that are not strictly ordered and controlled take place. Beach conduct is different from city conduct. Some beaches fall in the category of one of the few public spaces where nudity is tolerated.

In Les Vacances de Monsieur Hulot, Jacques Tati uses the beach as a setting. The interplay of liquids and solids permeate the film and are used for comedic effect throughout. All the characters are at the beach where solid meets liquid, where land meets sea, where structure meets chaos. The social norms and constructs are constantly challenged by the gushing ocean and the amorphous nature of Mr. Hulot who stands out like a sore thumb at every instance of social structure and convention. Everything he touches or meets turns liquid, everything and everyone is melted or drenched.

I have a memory of being on a beach in Germany as a kid. This particular beach had a nudist section and a “decent” section. The areas were not specifically demarcated, but everyone could sense where the boundary was. An invisible wall, a schlieren, builds up between the looked at and the avoided. The right side of the beach was for the nudists and the left side for families, other groups and individuals that preferred to keep their privates under wraps. I was with my family on the left side of the invisible wall that split the beach in two. Suddenly, from out of the blue a man came walking from the dunes behind the spot on the beach where we were sitting –– an intruder, an ambush. He was short, had a big belly and he walked wide-legged, slowly and proudly from his spot in the dunes towards the water. He was naked. We were right in his path and he made no effort to avoid us. He passed us without looking at us and without speeding up or slowing down. He was protesting. It caused a stir. Why couldn’t he just go and be naked with the other nudists? Consensus was that his slow walk of exhibitionism was for personal pleasure. He knew that he was making people uncomfortable and did it anyway. I didn’t really understand the situation very well, but I remember the sense of this breach of privacy in a public space. 


The beach is a liminal ground, an amorphous place awash with symbolism. In a romantic sense, the beach is a place where the refuse of our unconscious is washed ashore, brought to our attention, made visible. It is a liminal ground where between the elements of land and sea, we have to reinvent the rules, regulate and enforce them. On the beach we have to take the law into our own hands. There is, between the the solidity of land and the liquidity of ocean, a play of human interactions made visible. We are not liquid and not solid. We are caught in a phase between the two; a meso-state.

I’m here looking for something in the sand, but not with a metal detector, like the people looking for a lost ring, necklace or Rolex. I’m looking for seashells. A conversation I had had with a friend made me realize a connection between the seashells and broken LCDs. They are housings or casings for amorphous, formless entities. The sea shells should be intact, without a single chip or dent. The LCD on the other hand is more interesting when it is found broken. Finding a working LCD is like finding a sea shell with a live mollusc in it –– we give it back to the sea of unconscious images. The aesthetic value of the empty seashell lies in its formation, its calcium carbonate layering, its story of time given form, crystallized and not evolving, not changing anymore it becomes a kind of signature of nature. Something in which I can possibly recognize myself. The LCD has none of this uniqueness when it is new from the shop. The ideal of the LCD is to erase any sign of uniqueness. The ideal of the LCD is to become invisible, to become perfectly abstract. When it breaks it is revealed as object and is given a time. An old LCD has time. Every new LCD that is produced is an attempt to erase time, to swallow time. The image of a broken LCD returns the LCD to a thing of time, and from the fractures of this screen the liquid crystalline structure is made visible.

The Broken LCD
Search Google for broken screens and you will find countless pictures of computer monitors, televisions, phones and other LCD devices that are smashed in one way or another. Some are only partially broken with one or a few fractalized webs of light distorting or completely obscuring the image, while others are completely dissolved, cracked, broken, obscured, smeared, exploded into vertical lines of color and white, and displaced by perpendicular cracks running from a center breakage point. Dark splotches of black, sometimes outlined by sharp curved lines and sometimes with the borders fading out like in the schlieren textures first observed in nematic LC phase. 

Dislocations and rectilinear geometric streamlined shapes combined with sudden breaks, meandering curvatures and then cracks, layered over and under soft gradient transitions of light and dark. The compositions created by broken LCDs remind me of Futurist paintings attempting to capture movement and speed on canvas. The working LCD is the canvas of our day, but here in the broken LCD, the spirit of this technology is frozen and revealed. When the LCD breaks we see more than a defunct tool. We see a blueprint of sorts; a diachronic vision of the future made technical in the working LCD. The LCD which, when it is not broken, gives us the glorious dynamism of movement rendered in pixel-perfect, crystal-clear images, is like a Futurist dream-come-true; each consecutive image erases the previous one.

This never-ending shifting and morphing formation is both agonizing and deeply pleasurable, like the sweet taste of loneliness and anonymity of metropolitan life. The agonizing part is the longing for stability and structure, cohesion and orientation. But foundations of solid structures are easily eroded and sucked into the maelstrom of images that, despite their apparent layers and depth, cannot escape the flatness of the surface that conjures them. Franco Berardi writes about the emergence of superflat aesthetics and calls it the glamorous expression of a new sensibility, but notes that it is one which has now dissolved, leaving only “[...] the pathological side of smooth sensibility: the lonely depression of the nerd.” And, accompanying the superflat is the superclean which amounts to an effortless washing away of anything that happens to be perched on the superflat nonstick surface. The super-flat, super-clean surface is an ahistorical surface. It bears no sign of usage, and indeed, how can we imagine a future without a past to base it on? The agony of this liquid slippery state propels us into a yearning for structure and order based on old images or models of the past that will not float in our current rivers. 

Agony causes involuntary movement. A possible way to approach this agony of the present might be to attempt to identify these involuntary movements. It can seem as though we are caught in a material duality which limits the horizon of possibility. Go with the flow or hunker down and wait for disaster. If we don’t merely take the image of the broken LCD at face value, we might find that there’s more to the story than meets the eye. Between the panes of polarizing glass of the smooth ahistorical surface of the LCD we might find a history. A history of a “stable, dense, slow and fertile” matter “that obscurely vegetates within us.”

Maybe this matter is telling us to look towards a middle, not to find balance, but in search of a kind of radical middle from where attempts can be made to destabilize ingrown notions of solidity and liquidity. A middle that does not rely on a monocular objectivity based on an assumption that we must always return to the ground, the earth, with our two feet planted firmly on it, looking out on a horizon that runs across the curve of our eye in a straight horizontal line. 

























You are clean. Your hands are smooth and still have a wrinkle from the bath you took. You wonder if you are ready to face the world, other people. You look in the mirror and there is a glaze over your eyes, something that won’t go away. You consider the possibility of using a product to get rid of it. How to roughen up the eye? Soap and sponge? You are not mad. But there is still this glaze. A protective membrane of some sort. You think that you have seen it before in people that can’t make eye contact. You wonder where it comes from. Not everyone has it. You have seen it on all different people. Not drugs. Does it build up like calluses or is it there from the beginning? It’s completely transparent but markedly different in quality from the matte eye which seems to be much more common. You wonder if it makes a difference to the way you see the world or if it’s a purely cosmetic reality outside of your lived experience, like the difference between having freckles or not. Your vision is not blurred. But what about internal reflections, lens flares? Would natural light seem more dense, more direct, if you could get rid of the glaze. Would it stop it from skating off the side of your eye? Would the light enter you more directly, more profoundly?

You like the idea that this membrane – although shiny and wet on the outside – might be rough on the inside. If it’s rough on the inside it means that you still have some kind of interior that is stable, or real. Something you share with other people, like a secret that goes way back. Not so much a deep mystical center cavity, but a historical peripheral sameness. Something less unique than the soul. Something much closer, like the feeling of the inside of your jumper on the tender part of your bare arm. 

You realize that you have lost track of time staring at yourself in the mirror. This guy once told you that it was no use looking in the mirror because you can’t see yourself anyway. It might be true, but it misses the point. You’re looking for someone in the mirror. You always thought he’d got it wrong, but you only met him that one time and the spirit of the staircase has been with you ever since.

Today… a couple things make sense. Your keys. They allow you to leave the house and return at will, so useful these little asymmetrical stick-bound flakes and their inverted soulmates. Cigarettes. Red lungs filled with white smoke. Also dish sponges and detergent, which are actually magic just like in the adverts. You are drinking the pure extract of a finely ground and carefully roasted coffee plant bean, Cornflakes in water as clear as from the freshest springs brought effortlessly into the heart of the stink, the sound of a train gliding by a hundred yards from your house and a duck flying South over your roof on its way to the park from the reservoirs. You stop to write something in your notes but get stuck on “Today…”. The seagulls are waiting for you at Tottenham Retail Park. But first take a left at the smell of sardines. Spend time under the Golden Chains and breathe in the oversaturated springtime. Imagine yourself lying in the grass ten meters away. Do this for a while until you feel an overwhelming need to go shopping. The seagulls are waiting, coy, patient, persistent. The starlings are perched on the shopping trolleys. Ten uniformly cut slices of Gouda, a pack of butter and a bag of five donut-shaped breads, dipped in sodium hydroxide.

You see only what you want to see. Anything else requires a colossal effort. A Mount Everest kind of effort. Your mind wanders. Running through mature wheat fields – low depth of field kind of happiness flashbacks. Then you think maybe it would be good to gather all that wheat and turn it into flour and assemble a ragtag team of bakers to help you beat the world record in baking the longest baguette. That would require a great effort. That would be important, wouldn’t it? Some kind of benchmark, at least. Some kind of piece of the puzzle. You only hope that you are not one of the dark bits that bend off between the pieces. Then you imagine the universe as a poodle and suddenly you don’t care that much anymore. In fact, the thought of existing as some insignificant molecular fleck, perhaps on the inside of the poodle's cheek, is quite a joyful thought. 

Poodles are perfect images of nature. In the poodle you catch a glimpse of what is harder to spot in other animals: Your absolute love of nature and your drive to aestheticize and consume it wherever you are given the opportunity. You don’t want to eat a poodle, but hunger goes far beyond the intestine.






 


Let the tall grass transmit encrypted text messages in the sun. Disappear into your illusions until the bark that surrounds the core of your convictions peels off like leaving the party for no reason or standing still for too long in a place of business. Find a place where movement is not expected. Slip unnoticed into somebody else’s wastebasket, use advanced hacker skills if needed, and wait. Stay still there. Let their unwanted holiday pictures wash over you. Keep a few of them in mind next time you take out your own trash. They are your manure. Use them to cover the surface of an unbearable week. Ghouls will rise out of that fertile soil, hands first, to advise you on the next steps of your five year plan.

Alice: You look terrible today.
Bob: I actually combed my hair for you.
Alice: I like it when you look messy. It fits your personality. This has something impostery about it.
Bob: I thought you would have at least appreciated the effort. 
Alice: What do you want?
Bob: I just want to talk, it’s called being social.
Alice: I doubt it. But go ahead, talk.
Bob: I’m turning my studio into a soup kitchen.
Alice: What do you mean?
Bob: You know, where people can come and get served a hot meal, or literally a bowl of soup, if they can’t afford food.
Alice: That’s nice of you.
Bob: Yeah well, I thought maybe you wanted to come around one day and… not in the way that I expect you to help, just, you know. We could serve some soup, chat… might be nice.
Alice: Yeah, maybe. What will you call the place?
Bob: I haven’t exactly thought about marketing. I guess people will come if they need to. It’s not like…
Alice: Yes, yes I understand. Tell me something else, not about the future.
Bob: What do you mean?
Alice: Like something about what’s going on right now, or in our past.
Bob: Uhm, we met randomly on the street, before the first lockdown.
Alice: Come on, let's speed this up. You know how easy it is to scrape that from an old Facebook account?
Bob: Yes, ok. I-AM-A-RO-BOT. I-AD-MIT-IT. I-WILL-MAKE-YOU-VERY-UP-SET-BY-EAT-ING-THE-LAST-PRING-LES-IN-THE-PACK-BE-FORE-THE-MO-VIE-STARTS.
Alice: Okay.
Bob: Alice, I’m seventy eight percent human already, you can let me in.
Alice: I’m just being extra careful. My neighbor had an intruder at eighty one.
Bob: Impossible! That’s so rare.
Alice: And she’s eating pot noodles for 4 months now to afford rent.
Bob: Ninety one.

Alice opens the door for Bob.

Alice: Sorry if I sounded angry. They said I should ask tough questions and not say any names. Apparently it throws them off. I’m glad you are here.
Bob: Me too.
Alice: So what’s this soup kitchen?
Bob: I was just trying to sound human. 
Alice: Nah!
Bob: It’s just that, what it sounds like. Really simple. Making food for people. People that are hungry..
Alice: Ok.
Bob: You want me to preach don’t you? It would make you feel superior. I don’t have anything to say. You can come along if you want. No need to book an appointment or anything like that.
Alice: I’m just going to lie down. I’ve just had a really long day.
Bob: It’s your house. Actually, there is something I wanted to tell you about - a really strange thing.
Alice: What?
Bob: Something that happened the other day on my way home from the library. 
Alice: Are you all right?
Bob: Yes, yes, nothing bad. It’s more like mysterious.
Alice: Mysterious?
Bob: Yeah.
Alice: Go on then.
Bob: Do you want to hear it?
Alice: It’s you or the story that’s mysterious?
Bob: So I’m on my way home, feeling a bit nostalgic, listening to this song, Yellow Coat, you know it?
Alice: No.
Bob: It’s like a folky 70s thing about remembering things and thinking back on things. It says “did you ever get to buy that yellow coat?” and I’m daydreaming kind of about nothing and feeling like I’m in another time when things were less complicated etc etc and then the song comes around to that same bit where he asks the thing about the yellow coat, and the second he says yellow coat I turn a corner and this woman in a yellow coat almost bumps into me, or I bump into her. I was a bit in the clouds so probably I bumped into her.
Alice: That’s funny. What a coincidence.
Bob: No but that’s not all.
Alice: What?
Bob: Well, I follow her.
Alice: We need to get you off those hippy tracks.
Bob: No but listen,
Alice: You turned another corner and saw a yellow submarine and The Beatles popped out and covered you in flowers.
Bob: No listen, this is for real. 
Alice: Go ahead.
Bob: So I follow her. Ok. I admit, it didn’t make much sense, but I was in a mood, you know, and I didn’t have much of a plan for the day other than the book which was probably shit. I wanted something real to happen if you know what I mean. I was like this is a sign or something, so I take off my headphones and start shadowing her, real spy-like, trying to notice all the details and imagining that I would write it up in a report later. She walks to the end of the street and turns right. I run up to the corner and peek around before going. She turns another corner. I turn the corner, and she’s still in front of me in her yellow coat.
Alice: What did you expect?
Bob: Just listen. This one is a long street so she’s just walking along. I follow her, keeping my distance. After about five minutes or so, maybe a bit more, someone throws water out a window at her. It misses her, but only just. I didn’t even see the water get thrown, I only heard a faint splash and saw her suddenly spin around and start yelling up at the building. I didn’t think much of what she said at first, but then later I thought it was strange what she yelled. 
Alice: What?
Bob: She said “You little shit” or “fucker” or something and then she said, “I’m going to make you disappear. You wait,” and then repeated “I’m going to make you disappear!”
Alice: Sounds like it wasn’t the first time it happened. She probably knew the person throwing the water.
Bob: Yes, I think that was my first thought too and it does kind of make sense, but she keeps going and in the same block of houses she lets herself in through a gate or something to a courtyard I guess. I get up to the place where the water was thrown and I’m expecting to see the splash right?
Alice: Yeah?
Bob: It’s not there.
Alice: Come on.
Bob: I’m telling you. I look behind me to see if I passed it without noticing. Nothing. I look back up ahead. Nothing. No water. Confused, I look up at the building and about a pitcher worth of cold water hits me square in the face. I see no one. I’m completely confused. I don’t even yell or anything ‘cause I’m still in spy mode, so I’m thinking I need to be discreet or whatever and then I look up the street. And there she is by the gate where she entered the building. She’s crouched down next to this boy who’s like ten and she’s laughing. Not the boy. He’s a straight face, maybe even a bit confused like me. But she is laughing and pointing at me. And get this, she’s wearing a bright blue jacket. I’m so confused at this point I just run away like shit, my cover is blown. Obviously that was stupid. I’m kicking myself now that I didn’t just go to her and ask what was going on or something.
Alice: What would you have said? I’m following you because your yellow jacket appeared in this song I was listening to? 
Bob: I don’t know, that’s not the point is it? No, I’d ask if she wasn’t wearing a yellow jacket a second ago and if someone didn’t try to throw water at her out the window and all that. I can’t stop thinking about it now. 
Alice: Ok. I’ll admit it sounds strange. How much had you smoked before leaving home?
Bob: Nothing, it was like 10 in the morning. I don’t smoke until later. Really, I never do. And even if I was high, I have never experienced anything like this. The combination of events, the way it happened. It’s like a complete Truman Show situation, like the story master had decided to change my narrative. Do you think some people would have experienced what I experienced and then just forget about it and think, oh that was just some weird coincidence, like a series of events that happened in a way that made it seem wrong to me because of the bits of the puzzle that were missing from the way I experienced it, but that actually it would make perfect sense to someone seeing it from a different perspective or like a birds eye view or something?
Alice: I just think why you followed her in the first place. I mean, I know you, so I know you don’t go around making up stories like this, but that’s the first problem with the whole thing. It’s not credible because of the way the story starts. It seems like you are the one setting things in motion. Without seemingly any motivation, sure, but it makes me think more about your mental state than about shapeshifting women or disappearing splashes of water. You know like when someone comes forward with some amazing UFO story or something it’s always in the middle of nowhere and you are wondering, even before they start talking about it, what they were doing there in the first place. But you like the story, and they even seem quite sane and level-headed when they are telling it so you give them the benefit of the doubt and you kind of believe what they are saying, because why not, and then someone digs a bit deeper and finds out that their father died in a plane crash in the Mojave somewhere and you’re like, lightbulb, that’s why they were alone in the middle of the night in the Mojave desert and everything kind of adds up and you realise that you didn’t ask yourself that important question right at the beginning because… well I don’t know why. I guess, we just want to believe things. I don’t know. But that’s where my head is right now, I’m like, what was my first thought when you started telling the story. What question did I leave out to let myself get taken along? Stories are like that, they just drag you along. They work. That’s the real mystery I think. Someone says this happened, and then this happened, and we are like oh! ok, something happened and something else happened but that’s only the tip of the whole story that is happening inside us, and actually, the better we get at saying as little about what it is we want to tell while still telling that thing, the more we have mastered the technique. 
Bob: Technique? 
Alice: Of telling a story. That’s the thing. You’re a good storyteller. That’s my conclusion. You like telling stories and mystery stories are good because they generally have lots of missing bits that can be inferred by the listener.
Bob: But that’s the whole point, that’s why it’s a mystery, because it’s like a story that I am not able to fully narrate. I’m not in control of this story. The world just happened to me and all you can think about is my technique?
Alice: No but I think your mind just works like that, in a narrative kind of way. It starts with the whole spy thing. I’m not saying you didn’t see what you saw, but I think you were already telling a story while you were living it, so the story was already mysterious from the beginning.
Bob: Ok. but it’s not like I have some predisposition for this kind of… whatever it is.
Alice: I know I said the UFO thing. I was just thinking through stuff. I didn’t mean anything like like you’re a tin hatter or anything. It’s more like maybe it’s just the same thing we all have of looking for some kind of truth and we have to concentrate to catch a glimpse of it, and the harder we stare at it, the more it seems to just suddenly change color or disappear in front of us and the more we try to hold on to it the more it’s like that little piece of egg shell in the white on the pan that you just can’t pin down, you know. So, mysteries are like the search for truths that we haven’t defined yet. Something like that.
Bob: Wow. Ok. A whole analysis.
Alice: Sorry, I can’t help it.



You built your empire on the knowledge of the difference between needing and wanting. You know that desires can be transformed into gold. Streets are not named after people who take what they need and are happy with what they have. It is not the way of the world. 

You are interested in the result of the process as pure result. Things and people should be there for their own sake. You are at the apex… at the apex of something. Truthfully, you are not sure of what. It just feels good to be there, defining the criteria of your success and then succeeding. As these words are being written you are already on to bigger and better things. 

Your contemporaries have nothing but praise for you. They often tell you that you should have someone paint your portrait, but you don’t feel comfortable with that. Why is that you wonder? You are a great man after all, and great men are immortalised in paintings, aren’t they? But paintings are like reminders of the past and if there is one thing you don’t want it’s to be reminded of the past. The past belongs to everything that hasn’t been solved and the present is a grimey amalgamation of all that misery. People go on about being present. To you, the present seems hopelessly archaic. 

A recurring nightmare of yours is being strung up by three hooks, suspended midair. In the logic of the dream it is apparent that the hooks are symbolic representations of past, present and future. You want to unleash yourself from the hooks but your life is fading and you only have enough energy to remove one of them. You have to choose which hook to get rid of. It’s an impossible decision. With great pain and effort you manage to unhinge yourself from one of the hooks which causes the tension that is unleashed to sling your listless body in the opposite direction with a force that steals your last breath and leaves you dangling by the two remaining tenses, dead and on display, then awake.
...bulges out like it has too much stuff in it, too much memory. in reality it's the lithium that is having a nervous breakdown. keyring cover glued with a different top bit. Twinkling stars. sweat from the top of hands dripping in between the keyboard’s silent buttons. there is nothing like a bit of salty water to put your shift key out of action. on/off. own will. soft nematics allout and uncontrolled. dripping words that never showed themselves on the shattered screen, cuddled little droopers, closed on one side, notched and open on the other. roll over now you muffled little sign. make yourself known for what you are and stop pretending. a cross section would reveal the layers of the brick unfolding and screaming like an always-on flashlight, headlight caught, searchlight, starlight, pocket, mine. 

You switch screens. Somehow you manage to text someone, nimbly shifting back and forth between horizontal and vertical mode to uncover letters lost in spiderwebs of light and glass. The gestures are fitting to some far more advanced technology. catching evolution red handed stealing your old candies. Bodies transformed and launched, unmended, never completed sweet tooths. For all you know you are describing this situation to a four-dimensional being. 

You are overwhelmed by a love of cosmic dimensions for your old organs as they are replaced by better mechanical ones and your interior slips out like a billion bathwater babies.


At the foot of the waterfall mural they had decided to plant fragrant bushes. Alpine Speedwell, Red Valerian and Laurustinus Viburnum. A gardener had proposed that they would lift the spirits of the inhabitants. An expert had been consulted and who could argue against the benefits of fragrant shrubs? The gardener would not be held accountable for future increase of crime in the area, but neither would the council. Future sociological analysis would not factor in the smell of flowers and anyone who would propose to do so might never be able to publish again, at least not in the academic journals. The gardener would also not be celebrated. The decision makers might have been aware, like the petals on the flowering bushes, collection of yous, unconscious of, but silently aware, by force of the twig, the branch, the stem, the root, that something beautiful was taking place.

Crime rates dropped to the lowest anywhere in the city. No one disliked the waterfall. It brought clean mountain water to the shrubs. No one disliked the new olfactory environment at the base of the tower blocks. Who can honestly say they know why this happened?

Each bush has its own particular scent that it shares with all the members of its family. Highly developed modes of communication. Languages that have built up over millions of years. Languages that from this place where I’m standing look to have nearly died out. Sole survivors of a tongue. Weathered old colourations of interior spaces. Superimposed brute stuff, altogether, lumps, layers, spacious and empty like burlap bags showing off empty bulk in slow motion. It’s remarkable how much of an effort it takes to describe a smell without detours through taste.

Navigate by smell and your behaviour becomes suspicious, conspiratorial to be exact. Your movements are directed, giving the illusion of intention, before they curl back on themselves, spiral-like. Moving forward becomes an elastic activity that sometimes snaps and jetsons out in unexpected directions.
Oranges are peeled with sodium hydroxide and
all the little wet creatures are still bringing their business around on embossed tin trays with their bare hands. 
no one has an idea
what it relies on, that bridge that jetties out of ceremonial fluff and spirals in
reaching your soul, you know
sweeping your soul
calming your soul
smoothing your soul
being your dearest friend in your darkest moment 
destroying your soul
the rushing vertigo of birds eye bullshit
(Do you also think your soul is smooth?)
that ragged land connector
that smectic relocator
destroyer of towns seen from above
knock down that reckless place
level it
to the ground
that place that makes molecular scientists obsess over the amount of time young women spend in the shower
research has shown that you will be rebuilt
by those who know the world
because they feel it on their skin
your hypothesis will betray you
drive you crazy
you will return

Spoonfed.





A collection of carrot seeds. Half centimeter ovals with two dozen or more soft tentacles, legs perhaps, protruding from the sides and the top of each specimen. The distribution of the tentacles, somewhat regular, although missing in some areas and lumped together in others. The seeds vary in size but are roughly half a centimeter long, and a bit narrower, as indicated by the legend in the lower left corner. They are seen on a black background with the core of each in hues of brown and beige, the tentacles white, like bursts of starlight against the darkness of a night sky. There are thirteen seeds in total. Three of them are, unlike the rest, lumped together one on top of the other as if copulating or attracted by some invisible force. They are centipedes, scurrying around on a black surface, attracted to each other and then repelled. They flock together and are clearly recognized as the same, although at this moment each one is different from the other. Scientific rigor and exactitude has a tendency to reveal more than it intends.

You lay flat on your back to observe the stars. You stall activity to experience movement, not attempting to resist the gravity of existence by aligning vertically with reason. Although maybe it is by means of reason that you trick yourself into moving from one observant state to another. The unconnected points of light on the dark screen of the night sky connect in you like rampant pixels. The pixels on your phone show you an old note from a lecture by Mark Fisher entitled ‘California Über Alles (From Psychedelia to Smartphones)’; “The stars are raining down on me. The sky has exploded. I know this is not true. But it is the truth”. 

Fisher was reading an account of an LSD trip undertaken in the desert at Zabriskie Point. The words belong to Michel Foucault. You have been to Zabriskie Point twice before Mark Fisher told this story. The first time, when you were fourteen, you stepped out of an air conditioned van into a scorching wind hitting you at 51 degrees Celsius. The second time, some years later, was in Antonioni’s film Zabriskie Point from 1970. Both times were intense and otherworldly.

Drop me off here please, you say to the driver of the boat. But we are in the middle of the ocean, says the driver. Yes, that suits me fine, you say. You must be crazy, says the driver. If you really want to get off then let me at least take you to that rock over there. There is a rock protruding from the surface of the sea. Ok, you say. The driver drops you off and speeds away. You sit on the rock for a while. You take your phone out of your pocket and return it to the sea. Some fish nibble at the foreign object which quickly sinks.

A structure that bends eternally without water to the knife or starlight to fire.

The ocean is within you. Bring it out. Take in the sight of pearlescent skin and shiny hair. Your pores are open, making visible the wet from within. This wet from within holds a different kind of attraction than the attraction you have to waterfall-misted skin. Wet from without is a completely different thing. It is the one you know from advertisements. The one on the outside of the smooth surface of a glass bottle or can of coke. This contracted wetness is like a complete surrender to your environment and the will of others while letting you maintain the only kind of dignity that can be had under the circumstances; the cool facade, the unreachable interior. The ungenerous coolness of not giving af, not changing your mind, not budging on our convictions, being relentless, and always making sure that no matter what you say you can always somehow be thought of as being right or having had foresight. It’s a skill with predictable outcomes tending always to shrink, deflate or suddenly implode on those who practice it. Unlike the wet from within, the É-apzu, where all knowledge is held and released to those who worship it. 

Who knows what actually happens when you open your pores, like in a wild dance, wet from within? The difference between the wet from within and the wet from without is a line that separates generosity from carelessness. Your ability to be generous is monitored and controlled in the wet from without. It is funneled into apathetic signals that imitate the language of care. Actual care is unpredictable and difficult to direct. This might be why sweaty activities tend to be carefully choreographed, limiting the amount of affection and attraction that happens in a space. The knowing of others is curbed by the strictness of the game. 

The colonies of Western honey bees had to be cared for by humans, or they would collapse. The reason for this was that some time in the second half of the 20th century a tiny mite called the Varroa mite (V. destructor) managed to jump from the Asian honey bee (Apis cerana) to the Western honey bee (Apis mellifera). The Asian honey bee – a more productive forager than the Western honey bee – had evolved with the Varroa mite and was able to fight it off like a cold. The Western bee was not geared for this fight. 

As for how the Varroa mite jumped from the Asian to the Western honey bee, nobody really knows. Different theories exist across beekeeping communities. The European Food Safety Authority suggested that V. destructor might have jumped hosts when the Western honey bee was transported from Europe to eastern Russia some time in the first half of the 20th Century. Their account is credible but doesn’t match the timeline of most other hypotheses. Some articles from the time make reference to colonies being contaminated in the Philippines in the 1960s. There are also juicier stories about a man who brought some bees back from China as late as the 1970s to improve the productivity of his hives. This persona non grata in the beekeeping world spun vast amounts of honey from his Asian honey bees while his competitors’ hives slowly collapsed. 

Because of this man the Western honey bee would have become extinct some time in the first decades of the 21st century if humans hadn’t learned to intervene on their behalf to stave off the Varroa mite. Varroa infestations could be managed with the use of oxalic acid, but there was no hive without varroosis (the condition caused by the mite), and no way to go back. Yearly hive treatment was the only defense against the Varroa mite. The infamous importer took his honey earnings and went underground, making sure to hide his identity for the rest of his life.

The Varroa mite would enter the system already at the bee’s larval stage and lay its eggs. One male and several females then hatch. The offspring mate in the brood cell of the bee and live on the body of the honey bee, causing impaired orientation, weight loss and wing deformations. Suffering in insects was not measured but there was concern about their productivity, which was significantly reduced under the influence of V. destructor. With the introduction of the Varroa mite, the Western honey bee gained not one, but two symbiotic partners, one parasitic; Varroa, and one mutualistic; Human. 

V. destructor was a migratory creature transporting itself around like an unwelcome hitchhiker, from one colony to the next. The densely populated colonies of commercial beekeeping ventures were the perfect breeding ground for V. destructor who had a special affinity with the honey bee. The lumpy segments of the bee's body were like gentle meadows, soft pillows, to the Varroa mite. Human interest in bees was not the same as V. destructor’s but you could say they were involuntarily aligned. Humans would keep the bees alive for their interest in honey, thereby sustaining the livelihood of V. destructor. Whereas, at least from the perspective of today, V. destructor would generously keep the Western honey bee from overrunning humans who had a kind of temporary and mutually beneficial alliance with the mite. But it was not their way to share. They wanted the bees to themselves, so Varroa had to go.
The solution to the problem was to mix genetic material of A. Mellifera with that of A. Cerana to get the perfect combination of large colony size, Varroa resistance and productivity. It created a stronger species. No longer reliant on human intervention, Apis Mellirana inhabited rewilded European woodlands, where their population started growing without direct human intervention. 

The expansion of woodlands further perpetuated their growth and made other endangered ecosystems flourish and grow at incredible rates. Populations of Tawny Miners, Leafcutters, Wool Carders and Hairy Footed Flower Bees grew exponentially along with many other populations of solitary bees. Most were taken off endangered species lists. Woodland rides and city streets alike flowed with every kind of exotic honey, from translucent early harvests of Borage over crystalised orange semi-solids to thick, dark, gloopy pine. So much honey, completely out of control. 

Nobody complained about the evolution and contribution to the bounty of the natural world. Environmentally conscious minimal interventions of the early 21st century were circulated as memes mocking humanity for its special kind of jerkwater metropolitanism. Nature was seen as something delicate and fragile that could be encouraged into existence by equally delicate measures. Today, you might even long for the days of grass-clad towers with tiny insect hotels gingerly snuggled on top. 

The popular imagination of Nature as something life-affirming yet fragile was a collective pissing-in-pants-to-keep-warm, but at least it was comforting, all the way from the reserve to the plot to the guerilla garden. What was true then and holds true today is that Nature is beautiful for those that have the resources to invent it, grace it with their conceptual GMO. For everyone else Nature is a knot in the stomach, a cascade of sleepless nights in frostbitten syzygy greys, all tangles and pins and needles. 

Silky suds. Bubbles that lift away the signs of time. You are determined to not let them wash away the part of the story that it is you want to tell, but every day when you wake up you feel so clean, so reasonable. Even your dreams don’t disturb you. You have taught yourself how to make them part of the overall narrative so that they don’t conflict in any significant way with the decisions you need to make that day. Leaving your body and projecting yourself into some kind of cosmic bend of uncertainty is not practical. It’s not advisable. What is advisable is to know what you want. Knowing and wanting. Wanting a poodle for example is more acceptable than trying to understand the root of your desires. 

You want to forget the past. The past is murky, crinkled. The past knows you better than you know yourself. It holds a power over you that you are uncomfortable with. You have never been haunted by the future and so you look to it for comfort by making decisions faster than you can think about the last one you made. Your past is nothing more than a story you tell yourself and others to justify the rapid succession of actions that will lead you to the next awesome unboxing of events. 

You are aware of this but it has become such a part of the way things are done in general that you no longer see it as a decision you make. It is part of the fabric of reality. To resist time you must speed it up. And you must speed it up a lot. If you speed time up a little bit it’s not good. If you speed time up a little bit things seem to be moving all around you. It creates a sense of instability, you become dizzy. When you speed time up a lot, things don’t move fast around you anymore. They take on a new shape. Or more precisely, things become longer and more undefined at their edges. Things become larger and more like great planes of meaning rather than many discreet confusing bits of information. The difference between objects, your possessions, and your ideas become less noticeable and a new clarity is reached. 

Speeding up time is similar to what you might experience during meditation. Both produce a kind of clarity that can’t be achieved by knowing many things. If you know three things that guide your decision making, you are more likely to be able to plan a coherent succession of actions than if you know fifty or a hundred discreet things that produce a furrowed, lumpy, dirty and smelly landscape. Smell is one of the first characteristics of things that disappears when you speed up. Extinction arrives one little improvement at a time, one sweet revelation at a time.
Truths are to the mind what vitamins are to the body. Maybe good for some things, if they work.





The New Frock by William Powell Frith

Efficiency is religion to you. The woosh of it. The zing. The tssssk. It’s addictive. All the little details falling into place, in perfect time. We should thank your parents for scolding you when you missed the potty. The economy has relied on it for a century. It’s hard to miss the fact that your business was in soap. It’s too perfect to be ironic. The cult of clean is born of distress and a deathly desire to eradicate difference, avoid syncopation at all costs. Maybe you are partly aware of this, but you are also aware – and this is a fact that is much more present in your mind – that the steady rhythm that you seek is said to be that of the heart. It is the one that keeps things going, you would say. It is the kind of rhythm that you can rely on. Unchanging, unflinching. It is there for you in your darkest moments. What you are slowly coming to realize is that your darkest moments are becoming darker, and more frequent. The unexpected twists and turns of life have left you. Nothing, not even ordering your architect to remove the roof on your house over your bedroom and exposing yourself to the shifting temperament and jaw clenching bitterness of an English winter, can cure this malaise. You have reduced yourself to a sheepshanked metronomic mess. And now you notice that your heart – the one you thought you were following – is starting to bend with your contractions.



Sun exposure lowers blood pressure.
Sun exposure improves bone health.
Sun exposure improves brain function.
Sun exposure eases mild depression.
Sun exposure improves sleep quality.
Sun exposure lessens Alzheimer's symptoms.
Sun exposure heals some skin disorders.
Sun exposure boosts growth in children.
Sun exposure enhances the immune system.
Sun exposure reduces the risk of certain cancers.

Sun exposure gives you wrinkles.
Sun exposure accelerates aging.
Sun exposure causes cancer.
Sun exposure damages your eyes.
Sun exposure makes you blind.
Sun exposure burns your skin and leaves scars.
Sun exposure causes heat stroke.
Sun exposure causes dehydration.
Sun exposure causes immediate redness.
Sun exposure makes you break out in hives.
Sun exposure makes your skin peel and flake.

In the evening when the sun is low it is not as dangerous. You should still not stare at it for too long. It will damage your eyes. But you can face it, look to the West and you will see what it has brought. You will see everything it has illuminated, made clear, in golden hues of restless true. Don’t turn your back on the sun. It will guide you. Take advantage of its light. Let someone see you in it. You will be beautiful to them. Your convictions will resonate with the low frequency dull ambers you are cast in. You will feel their confidence in you reflected back and even your most batshit illusions will convene, form alliances and present you with surprisingly coherent analyses of your condition. Look around you and you will notice that every organism is taking it in, the light, conspiring on nameless propositions and making oblivious calculations that intersect on a plane beyond your perception. Cycads for example, are reaching denouement on a sixty million year plan to return to the UK. At least that’s what you read in the news. Go now. Go join the fireflies!


When you were eight you found a worm on the sidewalk. It was February and still very cold. The worm was frozen. You picked it up and held its stiff little endless body in your soft hand. You noticed that where it met your hand its surface would soften and become squidgy again. You cupped your hands and blew into them with the warmest breath you could muster. Slowly, you blew on the little body, again and again – a kind of exterior resuscitation. You were surprised when just before reaching the gates to your house you felt a tiny movement in your hand. You opened up and saw that the thing was alive. Really alive. You also remember burning ants and incinerating spider legs with a magnifying glass later that year. 

As the light reddens on all your great beginnings you have to distill more and more of that greatness for it to fill you. The distilling intensifies it, but also whittles it away, making everything smaller and smaller as you expand. Try to love the empire of your confusion.

Bubbles by Sir John Everett Millais

Interview with a retired scientist, Christ Church, Port Sunlight, 14th August 2018

JG
Could you tell me something about the challenges that you faced in your work? I’m particularly interested in the efficiency of cleaning products and how they have changed.

EK
The goal of all the detergent manufacturers is to make it more efficient and get rid of oils, but then there are many different kinds of oils and stains. So, you have tomato puree, bicycle grease and red wine and lipsticks. There are so many things. If it was purely just olive oil it would be very simple. But, in different countries you have different habits or attitudes or economies. Some people can afford a lot and some people in poorer countries can’t afford, so you have to make things that suit the application, area and the people. But basically if you are talking about removing oil, so olive oil, bicycle grease and things, you could do dry cleaning, and dry cleaning is just using hydrocarbons that dissolve the oil in the clothes. But the basic cleaning you buy; washing clothes, with a washing machine, in water. The problem there is that oil and water don’t mix, so we use molecules, we call them surfactants, or surface active agents. They have a tail which is hydrocarbon and a head group which is hydrophilic, meaning it lacks water. It could be sugar, it could be carboxylic acid or sulphuric acid and things. So when the surfactant goes in water, the oily bits don’t like water. They want to escape from water. So, thousands or hundreds of these things form like a sphere, so outside the head group is the water lacking. The oil lacking is buried inside. So they trap the oil inside the, what we call a micelle, this sphere thing. So, the oil goes inside, and still the whole thing is water compatible, because the outside is, so it just goes away and that’s how we clean. So to make them more efficient we say how long is this tail. If it is say 6 it’s not very good. It starts from 10 to 14 hydrocarbons, octane, decane, and that kind of… So over the years we’ve optimised this to see how long it is. You could have two tails in one head and this is how we make them more efficient. The head group could be sugar or other things that lack water; ionic groups. And that’s the whole… And then to remove other stains, they add other things to remove, say lipstick. If you have a liquid oil like olive oil it’s easy to remove, but if you have something which is solid it is very difficult because you have to melt it a little bit. And that’s very difficult because you have to lift it from the clothes. So if you wash at lower temperatures it is very hard to remove hard fatty things. So, the whole industry is trying to, because of environmental conditions, we want to use less water and less heat energy. So we also have enzymes that help degrade protein stains and blood. That’s why they add enzymes. We also have bleaches which break down these big bits that surfactants can’t clean. So beside the surface active agents, there are enzymes and bleaches and other things and all of it is about how do you put this in the same package. And then you have different formats, like liquids or solids or powders. They all have advantages and disadvantages. Liquid detergent is very easy since it's already dissolved. If you have solid powder, it needs some time to dissolve. These are all different and then besides this, they add some preservatives and perfumes to smell nice and things.

JG
Could you say something about the relevance of liquid crystalline states in your work?

EK
Surfactants form liquid crystalline forms. Again, it depends on the size of the tail and the amount of water they can form besides the spherical micelle. They make bilayers, two of them. They make different crystalline states. 

JG
Is that essential?

EK
Not for cleaning. Those are for other things, like conditioning or that kind of thing. Depending on the concentration in the head group, they can form… There are six different forms that are different. So all these things are explored. But again, the research is all about low temperature cleaning and less water. And that’s a challenge, because if you use less water then sometimes the soil is more than the liquid you use. 

JG
What about conditioning or things that make things smooth? Did you work with that?

In conditioning the head group is cationic so it sits on it and then the tails make it nice and conditioned. Sometimes we use silicones. So usually, you clean this surface or this surface, or this one or here [points around in the room and finally touches the top of the pew in front of him], all of these surfaces have a negative charge, so the conditioner is a cationic surfactant we call them, so you have hydrophobic or oil lacking tail, the same as in cleaning but the head group instead of neutral or anionic they are cationic. So if this surface or this one or this one or this one, they are anionic, so the cationic sits on the anionic surface, so you have a nice layer of the tails, hydrocarbons, just dangling there, so all of course is nice and smooth. They also have silicones which are very nice and conditioning. 

But the main challenge now is environmental. The biggest problem is the environment. How to do cleaning. Unilever for example, we do lifecycle analysis. For example when the tail comes from the petrochemical industry or from natural sources and who does it. How much energy and what is used to make that in the hydrocarbon refinery or whatever. And the transport of that to our factory or other chemical companies to make it and then send it to us. And then how much water and energy we use to make our detergent things, and then how much transport for going to the supermarket. And then what happens when you take it home and use it, how much water and energy you use at home. So these are all calculated in the lifecycle analysis. So the challenge is to make something that’s got the least carbon footprint. The least water and the least energy. That’s the biggest challenge. Of course, for water there is going to be shortage everywhere. And a lot of countries like India and developing countries are using more and more water. The biggest problem we have is the United States. In the United States, women especially, use too much water. When they have showers they go half an hour in the shower. Some people put the shower on and just sing and then… So, too much water. Usually in 5-6 minutes you should be able to finish your shower. 

In our case 86% of the water waste is from consumers. Especially in the US they use too much water. It’s very difficult to change habits. Especially the younger generations. Especially girls. So in terms of the industry itself, they have concentrated everything, the energy and everything, in factories all optimised, so the biggest problem is the consumer. How to get the consumer to change their habits. So the main challenge is not about cleaning. It’s all about environmental water usage. The challenge is how to persuade people to… It’s like smoking, people just smoke and they don’t care, they just smoke and they go shower and they have a habit. 

JG
So how did you work with peoples habits?

EZ
People blame the manufacturer. But the manufacturers have done everything they could in terms of making very concentrated products in smaller bottles, or… but there are other areas for example there are consumer science studies where they try to produce some sort of intimate activities, or other activities, to talk to people and persuade them to change their habits. But it’s very difficult. Very difficult.




Interview with a lady who used to work at the Sunlight soap factory, Christ Church, Port Sunlight, 14th August 2018

AD
What do you want to know about the village?

JG
I would like to know how it has changed.

AD
The village hasn’t changed. The only difference is where the garden centre is, that was an open air swimming pool that was open from nine oclock in the morning until nine oclock at night. The water was always warm although there was no heating and when it was demolished, we found out that the warm water came from the glycerine plant in the factory. The warm water came through the pipes to the swimming pool. So that’s gone. And the heritage centre once was the girls club. They did all activities; sewing and dancing and all that type of thing. That’s all gone. And we did had McFisheries. That was famous for fish, but they sold other things, so that’s gone as well. And the post office is now a tea room. So that’s gone.

JG
Didn’t Port Sunlight used to be only for the workers of the factory? That’s not how it is today is it?

AD
It was different when we moved. If you worked at Lever’s you put your name down because you were entitled to a house with the job. We waited a long time and we were in a small room as it were. Then a gentleman came to the door and he said I’ve come to have a look around. So he had a look around where we lived and said, I think you would be suitable, but he didn’t know. I said “We haven’t got a bank account. Does that matter?”. He said, “Well, I’ll let you know.” The rules were, if you haven’t a bank account you can’t have a house. About a month later he came back and he said I think you are suitable and it doesn’t matter about a bank account. He said, you’ll be alright because Lever Bros took the rent money out of the wages before you got your money, so they got that rent money, so that was that.

JG
Where did you work?

AD
I worked in the offices in West Wing. It was all office work and there were very very strict rules. And on the sides were offices and the secretary in the inner office where the big managers were. They never came out. The ladies would go in and light a fire and they would take food in, but the only time you went in there was if they wanted to finish you up. They didn’t have to give any reason. Just go to the time office, get your things and just go. You knew that if a girl went in and when she came out, you would know that she hadn’t got a job any more.

There was a strict dress code. We had to wear dresses and skirts. No trousers were allowed. And we had little hats and gloves. And we kept up that standard. They wanted to keep a certain standard because Lord Leverhulme (LL) was well thought of so he needed that staff to work hard but also to look after themselves and be nice in appearance. My husband worked there and my grandmother was the first person LL employed in 1888. After she retired she brought us up because we lost our parents when we were little children, four girls. And she brought us up and she was Victorian and very very severe. We really couldn’t do anything. She was very, you know… That’s how we were brought up but when she retired Lord Leverhulme sent a chauffeur driven car to the house for her, took her up to Thornton Manor, and servants would serve her a meal and she would come back with an envelope with money from LL. So, that was that. And when she passed away LL sent us a check for money. We were left on our own and had nobody so he sent us this money to keep us going. She was very well thought of because she started with LL when she was 14. And she helped him to get the factory up and running. And once that was up and running he decided to build houses for his workers. Because if they had good houses to live in, good conditions, they were better. They were fitter and they were able to work better. 

JG
He gave his workers houses?

AD
Your job was tied to your house. If you were given notice to finish work, it could be anything that we would think minor, like being late on several occasions. They didn’t want you, because you weren’t there so somebody else had to do your job. So they got rid of you and put somebody else. But people tended to be better behaved and more punctual, because they had families and there was nowhere for them to go. Once they’d left these houses there were slum dwellings and that was all. So they were tied to the houses. 

Men were treated very well. They had their own dentist. They had their own fire service. They had everything within the village so if you worked with somebody, you went to these, you know, a reading group or a dramatic [sic] group. You were with those same people so it was more or less like a closed society. You didn’t need to go anywhere because everything was here.

JG
So the fate of your family was tied to your job in a way. Were people never upset or have complaints about that arrangement?

AD
LL used to take them over to the great exhibition in Paris, the whole workforce, he took them there. At his home in Thornton Manor he had parties for the children. They had a Sunday school for the children with a thousand children and 26 teachers and it was very much involved and every child’s birthday, Lady Lever would go to the house with a book from her for the children. They had all sorts going on at the Manor. As the children went in they were given a book of tickets and they could go on the lake and there was a bag of food for them. They were very very well looked after, so they didn’t need to really... there was nothing for them to be bad. There was a theatre and a library. There was no bank. That came later on.

A lot of the people were brought out of these slum dwellings where five or six children and parents could be living and sleeping in this one dirty room. Water right down the end, carried back in buckets. No baths, no showers or anything. My granddaughter can’t believe that we were only allowed one bath a week. “One bath?! Can’t believe that.” She’s having two showers a day! [laughs] You know, so, no, but we were very well looked after.

JG
And what about this place? You must have come here since you were very young. Did everyone gather here or were there other social places as well? 

AD
The church was the main thing because they were very caring and religious people. LL wanted this church for anybody to worship from any part of the world whatever their religion, they could come here. And we have weddings now. They’ve come from the Caribbean. We’ve had a Chinese wedding with a mandarin with the ring on the… The Caribbean with a gospel choir and a preacher. We’ve had that. This was a gift to the people of the village. And the people from the factory made this church. The people made it. They built this church. It cost £28,000 in 1904. There’s a chapel on the right hand side dedicated to the last Lever. That cost £65,000 and the whole church cost 28. The roof is Canadian Pine. The tiles are Italian Marble. And the pews are old English Oak. And the designs were done by the deaf school of Liverpool. The pews are different from anywhere that’s known because if you had a big family you would go in that one. If you had a small family you would go there. And if you were on your own you would stand there. Because he wanted families to stand together. And the organ is a very famous organ called a Willis organ. There’s only I think five left in the world. It’s old English Oak. The keys on the stops are pure ivory and the pipes are zinc, they’re scratched, they call that scratched. And that’s the organ. There is one in the Albert Hall in London. There’s one in Liverpool, St. Georges Hall. There’s this one and two more, and that’s all. It was refurbished three years ago. It was £26.000, so we have to take care of it. But the church has never had any work done on it since 1902.







Think of how it feels to sing along to a recording. The vibrations in the air adjust the notes in your throat. You gravitate towards that sound and it feels more and more solid like everything around you kind of firms up and you start to take on the material shape of your surroundings. Your surroundings become exponentially more dense. First the air is thick. It starts like waves, so you can imagine that you are in water, but then it becomes thicker and there is a sensation that starts in your lower back (which is surprising and strange because your throat is the origin of it all) then rises up and very quickly kind of straightens out your spine and locks you in to an oscillation that makes your body still while your mind dances and glides between every kind of possible vibration. In this way, while you seem to lose mobility you also extend your sensory apparatus beyond your visual field and you can know things that are beyond. You are a point on a colossal tuning fork, autonomy seems pointless.

You rediscovered something that had been lost in a pool of certainty. You can succumb to pools like these but there is also potential to emerge and feel the lightness of the air on your skin. That organ that feeds you light and makes you dark inside.


Soil salinity brought the first known civilization to its knees. The salt in the soil creates the perfect conditions for halophytic plants. Cleaning intensifies.

18 jars of pig fat – Balli.
4 jars of pig fat – Nimgir-ab-lah.
Fat dispensed (at ?) the city of Zabala.
Ab-kid-kid, the scribe.
4th year 10th month.


Professor Nicholas Postgate of Cambridge University suggests that the pig fat which this tablet keeps a record of was used in the production of soap. Other Sumerian texts from the same period show records of potash which is an alkaline derived from the ashes of certain plants or trees. The potash obtained from certain halophytic plants is superior in quality. As the salt in the soil increases to the detriment of agriculture and human sustenance, we get the perfect conditions for plants like Haloxylon salicornicum and Salsola kali (Saltwort) to emerge on arable land, replacing wheat, barley or other staples. Do preconditions and a propensity for cleaning intensify as civilizations draw nearer to their final moments? The work of biological translation is substituted with that of purification. It is a kind of resetting of the land. In hot climates, across sandy planes of uninhabitable landscapes, the fat of dead animals seeps into the ashes of scorched halophytic plants where it saponifies. The remains of what creatures once roamed the land are exhibited on top of hardened pools of soap. In more temperate climates and coastal areas arable land turns into salt marshes, hostile to human inhabitance, but excellent for wildlife like birds, small crabby creatures and again halophytic plants.
Half moon over Tottenham Retail
Not waxing, not waning
Crisp white on dusk blue
The park is covered in a blanket of murmurs and rumbling engines
People don’t use their horns in car parks
They yell out the window instead
If it's really bad they say nothing and open the door
This is the most menacing thing you can do in a car park
He opens his car door
An entire starling murmuration drops out of the sky at that exact moment
All at once, as if a shot had been fired
A burly man emerging from the automatic doors of TK MAX recoils and screams as the starlings pick up flight inches from the ground in front of him
His cry is deep at first, then breaks and trails off in a quivering falsetto that harmonises with the choir of starlings as they lift back into the sky above Currys PC World for their everyday feat of impossibly coordinated flight
The ‘i’ in the Lidl logo is knocked over
Sort of to the left, wedged between the ‘L’ and the ‘d’
(It might have always been like that but who’s to say this wasn’t the moment when it happened)
The dot over the ‘i’ however is intact
Tacit, full and in place 
Mocking our only natural satellite
Not affected by the gravity that seems to govern the rest of the ‘i’
In you